Intro
the stat quest is odd so I'm gonna talk
about the odds and the log of the odds
stacked quest hello I'm Josh stommer and
welcome to stack quest today we're gonna
be talking about odds and log odds and
they're gonna be clearly explained the
Odds
odds are in favor that you're already
familiar with odds for example you might
say that the odds in favor of my team
winning the game are 1 to 4 visually we
have 5 games total one of which my team
will win and four of which my team will
lose so the odds are one to four
alternatively we can write this as a
fraction visually we have one game my
team wins divided by the four games that
my team loses if we do the math we will
see that the odds are 0.25 that my team
will win the game
here's another example you might say
that the odds in favor of my team
winning the game are five to three
visually we have eight games total five
of which my team will win and three of
which my team will lose so the odds are
five to three alternatively we can write
this as a fraction 5/3 visually we have
the five games my team wins divided by
the three games my team loses if we do
the math we see that the odds are one
point seven that my team will win the
game note ads are not probabilities the
odds are the ratio of something
happening ie
my team winning to something not
happening
ie my team not winning
probability is the ratio of something
happening I eat my team winning to
everything that could happen
ie my team winning and losing in the
previous example the odds in favor of my
team winning the game are five to three
however the probability of my team
winning is the number of games they win
five divided by the total number of
games they play eight here's the math
for the odds we have the ratio of 5 to 3
and for the probability we have the
ratio of 5 to 8 thus we see that the
odds in favor of my team winning are
different from the probability of my
team winning
now that we know that odds are different
from probabilities let's talk about how
odds can be calculated from
probabilities in the last example we saw
that the odds of winning are 1 point 7
and the probability of winning is 0.625
we can also calculate the probability of
losing the probability of losing is
0.375 note we could also calculate the
probability of losing as 1 minus the
probability of winning that equals 1
minus 5/8 and that gives us 8 divided by
8 minus 5/8 and ultimately we get 3/8
this is equal to 0.375 so either way we
get the same probability now let's take
the ratio of the probability of winning
to the probability of losing
alternatively we can put 1 minus the
probability of winning into the
denominator either way we get the same
ratio 5/8 divided by 3/8 the eights
cancel out since they scale the
numerator and the denominator by the
exact same amount thus the ratio of the
probability ends up being the same thing
as the ratio of the raw counts and so
either way we get the same odds 1.7 I
mentioned this because about 50% of the
time you see odds calculated from counts
and the other 50% of the time you will
see odds calculated from probabilities
either way you get the same results note
out there in the wild world of
statistics you will often see this
formula
simplified to this where P is the
probability of winning BAM
[Music]
Log
now that we know what the odds are let's
talk about the log of the odds let's go
back to the original example in this
example we calculated the odds of
winning as one to four or 0.25 if my
team was worse the odds of winning could
be one to eight or 0.125 and if my team
was terrible the odds of winning could
be one to sixteen or 0.063
and lastly if my team was the worst the
odds of winning could be one to 32 or
0.03 one we can see that the worse my
team is the odds of winning get closer
and closer to zero in other words if the
odds are against my team winning then
they will be between zero and one now if
my team was good then the odds might be
four to three or one point three in
favor of my team winning and if my team
was better the odds might be eight to
three or two point seven in favor of
winning and if my team was really good
the odds might be thirty two to three or
ten point seven in favor of winning we
can see that the better my team is the
odds of winning started one and just go
up and up in other words if the odds are
for my team winning then they will be
between 1 and infinity another way to
look at this is with a number line the
odds of my team losing go from zero to
one and the odds of my team winning go
from one to infinity and beyond the
asymmetry makes it difficult to compare
the odds for or against my team winning
for example if the odds are against one
to six then the odds are 1/6 which
equals zero point 1 7 but if the odds
are in favor 6 to 1 then the odds are 6
divided by 1 which equals 6 the
magnitude of these odds looks way
smaller than these odds taking the log
of the odds solves this problem by
making everything symmetrical
for example if the odds are against one
to six then the log of the odds or the
log of one divided by six which equals
the log of 0.1 seven which equals
negative one point seven nine
and if the odds are in favor six to one
then the log of the odds are the log of
6 divided by 1 which equals the log of 6
which equals one point seven nine using
the log function the distance from the
origin or zero is the same for one to
six or six to one odds double bail
okay now that we know the main idea
Logit
about the log of the odds let's get into
some details
earlier we saw that odds can be
calculated from counts and we saw that
the same odds could be calculated from
probabilities and that means we can
calculate the log of the odds with
counts or probabilities either way we'll
get the same value note the log of the
ratio of the probabilities is called the
logit function and it forms the basis
for logistic regression I mention it
because if you do logistic regression
you'll see it a whole lot it's no big
deal ok I get it odds are just the ratio
of something happening to something not
happening and the log of the odds is
just the duh log of the odds what's the
big deal to show you what the big deal
is all about if I pick pairs of random
numbers that add up to 100 for example
and use them to calculate the log of the
odds and draw a histogram the histogram
is in the shape of a normal distribution
this makes the log of the odds useful
for solving certain statistics problems
specifically ones where we are trying to
determine probabilities about win or
lose or yes or no or true or false type
situations triple bam
Summary
in summary the odds are just the ratio
of something happening I Eve my team
winning to something not happening
ie my team not winning and the log of
the odds is just the log of the odds
it's no big deal the log of the odds
makes things symmetrical easier to
interpret and easier for fancy
statistics one last thing before we go
even though the odds is a ratio it's
different from an odds ratio
but don't panic we'll talk about the
odds ratio in the next stat quest hooray
we've made it to the end of another
exciting stat quest if you like this
stat quest and want to see more please
subscribe and if you'd like to support
stat quest well liked the video and
consider buying one or two of my
original songs alright until next time
quest on
